QT-qiskit-singularity (#2407)
CSCfi/csc-user-guide: docs/apps/qiskit.md

of circuits, pulses, and algorithms. 

!!! info "News"
     **23.01.2025** Installed `qiskit/1.2.4` in a singularity container on LUMI with all major Qiskit packages and
     added support for multi-node Native Cray MPI GPU-acceleration allowing for performant multi node simulations 
     for up to 45* qubits.

> ## Available

Author: fixed

Currently supported Qiskit versions:

| Version | Module          | Puhti | Mahti | LUMI  | Notes                            |
| :------ | :-------------- | :---: | :---: | :---: | -------------------------------- |
| 1.1.1   | `qiskit/1.1.1`  |   X   |   X   |       |                                  |

> | 1.2.4   | `qiskit/1.2.4`  |       |       |   X   | Native Cray MPI with GPU support |

Reviewer: Could we add a note that this documentation does not refer to the Qiskit IQM module which is required for using Helmi?

Author: done

Includes all the major Qiskit packages (Terra, Nature, Aer, etc.) and GPU acceleration. The `qiskit/1.1.1` and `qiskit/1.2.4` packages include the following qiskit plugins:

```bash

> qiskit-aer-gpu>=0.14.2

Reviewer: Could we double check that this is correct?

Author: checked, made a table showing the qiskit packages and qiskit version for the containers for Puhti/Mahti (qiskit 1.1.1) and for LUMI (qiskit 1.2.4)

    ```bash
    #!/bin/bash
    #SBATCH --account=<project>
    #SBATCH --partition=standard-g
    #SBATCH --nodes=1
    #SBATCH --gpus-per-node=8
    #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=1
    #SBATCH --gpus-per-task=8
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=56
    #SBATCH --time=1:00:00

    export LUMI_QISKIT_SINGULARITY_CONTAINER_PATH=/appl/local/quantum/qiskit/qiskit_1.2.4_csc.sif
    export WRAPPER_PATH=/appl/local/quantum/qiskit/run-singularity

>     mask=mask_cpu:0xfe000000000000,0xfe00000000000000,0xfe0000,0xfe000000,0xfe,0xfe00,0xfe00000000,0xfe0000000000

Reviewer: Let's perhaps explain what this mask is doing?

Author: done, added a link to LUMI docs to bottom of page

    export MPICH_GPU_SUPPORT_ENABLED=1 

    srun --cpu-bind=$mask $WRAPPER_PATH $LUMI_QISKIT_SINGULARITY_CONTAINER_PATH python myprog.py
    ```

> ### Small code example of "myprog.py" without MPI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Small code example without MPI
```

Author: leaving this since the myprog.py is being referenced in the sbatch script, removing it is a nit that removes clarity in the example

> ### Small code example of "myprog.py" without MPI

Author: create tables for single node simulations with this custate vector being for Puhti and Mahti and the quantum volume being for LUMI

print('Counts(ideal):', counts_ideal)
```

Submit the script with `sbatch <script_name>.sh`

> ### Small code example of "myprog.py" on LUMI using a single node for 34 qubits 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Small code example to run on LUMI using a single node for 34 qubits 
```

Author: leaving this since the myprog.py is being referenced in the sbatch script, removing it is a nit that removes clarity in the example

* please reference the recommended resource allocation table below to see how many resources are required per amount of qubits you wish to simulate on LUMI. The example script below works on a single node as well as on multiple nodes.

```Python
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpile
from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap
from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator
from qiskit.circuit.library import QuantumVolume
import time

## CHOOSE PARAMETERS - Values obtained from sbatch script that are imported into SINGULARITY CONTAINER using SINGULARITYENV_*env variable -----------------------------------------

qubits = 34

> depth = 30                            # How many layers of quantum gates dioes the circuit have (Applies for Quantum Volume circuit)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
depth = 30                            # How many layers of quantum gates does the circuit have (Applies for Quantum Volume circuit)
```

transpiled_circuit = transpile(circuit, sim, coupling_map=coupling_map, optimization_level=0)

## RUN THE SIMULATION -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
result_statevec = sim.run(transpiled_circuit, shots=num_shots, seed_simulator=12345, blocking_enabled=use_cache_blocking, blocking_qubits=num_blocking_qubits, max_parallel_experiments=num_parallel_experiments).result()

## GATHER THE RESULTS AND PRINT WITH SOME ADDITIONAL METADATA ---------------------------------------------------------------------
input_data = {'Circuit' : 'Quantum Volume', 'Qubits' : qubits, 'Depth' : depth, 'Shots' : num_shots, 'Batched Shots' : use_batched_shots , 'Device' : sim_device, 'Simulation Method' : sim_method}
if (use_cache_blocking):
    num_processes = 2**(qubits - num_blocking_qubits)
    input_data['Blocking Qubits'] = num_blocking_qubits
    input_data['Num Processes'] = num_processes

dict = result_statevec.to_dict()
meta = dict['metadata']

print(f"{input_data}")
print(f"{meta}")
print(f"-------------------------------------------------------------- \n")
```

Submit the script with `sbatch <script_name>.sh`

> ### Example batch script - Multi-node simulations which leverage Native HPE Cray MPI with GPU acceleration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example batch script - Multi-node simulations which leverage Native HPE Cray MPI with GPU acceleration (LUMI)
```

Author: ### Example sbatch and python script - Multi-node simulations which leverage Native HPE Cray MPI with GPU acceleration on LUMI

> Example batch script for running a simulation on multiple LUMI nodes in the standard-g partition using all GPUs and all CPU cores on a node. This is for simulations involving 35 qubits or more (up to a maximum 45* qubits - see table below for recommended resource allocations based on amount of qubits you wish to simulate ):

Author: let's revise the tables after this documentation is pushed since it is further optimization which may require more thorough testing and another project with more GPU hours

=== "LUMI"
    ```bash
    ## Here is an example sbatch script for a 38 qubit simulation using 16 nodes
    #!/bin/bash
    #SBATCH --account=<project>
    #SBATCH --time=2:00:00
    #SBATCH --partition=standard-g
    #SBATCH --nodes=16
    #SBATCH --gpus-per-node=8
    #SBATCH --ntasks-per-node=8
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task=7
    
    export LUMI_QISKIT_SINGULARITY_CONTAINER_PATH=/appl/local/quantum/qiskit/qiskit_1.2.4_csc.sif

>     export GPU_WRAPPER_PATH=/appl/local/quantum/qiskit/run-singularity-with-gpu-affinity

Author: #!/bin/bash
    ## Here is an example sbatch script for a 38 qubit quantum volume simulation (myprog_MPI.py) using 16 nodes

    mask=mask_cpu:0xfe000000000000,0xfe00000000000000,0xfe0000,0xfe000000,0xfe,0xfe00,0xfe00000000,0xfe0000000000
    export MPICH_GPU_SUPPORT_ENABLED=1 

    srun --cpu-bind=$mask $GPU_WRAPPER_PATH $LUMI_QISKIT_SINGULARITY_CONTAINER_PATH python myprog_MPI.py
    ```

> ### Small code example of "myprog_MPI.py" using 38 qubits which we recommend running on 16 nodes 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Small code example using 38 qubits with MPI which we recommend running on 16 nodes 
```

Author: leaving this since the myprog_MPI.py is being referenced in the sbatch script, removing it is a nit that removes clarity in the example

*reference recommended resource allocation table below

```Python
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit, transpile
from qiskit.transpiler import CouplingMap
from qiskit_aer import AerSimulator
from qiskit.circuit.library import QuantumVolume
import time

## CHOOSE PARAMETERS - Values obtained from sbatch script that are imported into SINGULARITY CONTAINER using SINGULARITYENV_*env variable -----------------------------------------

qubits = 38

> depth = 30                            # How many layers of quantum gates dioes the circuit have (Applies for Quantum Volume circuit)

Author: fixed

transpiled_circuit = transpile(circuit, sim, coupling_map=coupling_map, optimization_level=0)

## RUN THE SIMULATION -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
result_statevec = sim.run(transpiled_circuit, shots=num_shots, seed_simulator=12345, blocking_enabled=use_cache_blocking, blocking_qubits=num_blocking_qubits, max_parallel_experiments=num_parallel_experiments).result()

## GATHER THE RESULTS AND PRINT WITH SOME ADDITIONAL METADATA ---------------------------------------------------------------------
input_data = {'Circuit' : 'Quantum Volume', 'Qubits' : qubits, 'Depth' : depth, 'Shots' : num_shots, 'Batched Shots' : use_batched_shots , 'Device' : sim_device, 'Simulation Method' : sim_method}
if (use_cache_blocking):
    num_processes = 2**(qubits - num_blocking_qubits)
    input_data['Blocking Qubits'] = num_blocking_qubits
    input_data['Num Processes'] = num_processes

dict = result_statevec.to_dict()
meta = dict['metadata']

print(f"{input_data}")
print(f"{meta}")
print(f"-------------------------------------------------------------- \n")
```

Submit the script with `sbatch <script_name>.sh`

> ### Recommended resource allocation based on number of qubits in your circuit for a "normal" Slurm job. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recommended resource allocation table 
```

Author: ### Recommended LUMI resource allocation table

> ### Recommended resource allocation based on number of qubits in your circuit for a "normal" Slurm job. 

Reviewer 2: Let's revisit the table next week

Author: ok

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the recommended resource allocation based on number of qubits in your circuit for a "normal" Slurm job.

```

> Please take note that the recommended nodes are twice the number of minimum resources needed to run a simulation but due to our tests we have found a significant speedup and cost savings of GPU hours if a user submits a job with double the amount of resources that are actually required to simulate a quantum circuit for any specific number of qubits. The Maximum number of qubits that can be simulated using the state_vector simulation method is a theoretical 45 qubits due to the total amount of nodes in the standard-g partition and the amount of system memory in each node. 

Reviewer 2: Memory required for statevector simulation of quantum circuit doubles for each qubit added. In LUMI, simulating 35+ qubit circuit requires using multiple nodes and MPI. For significantly improved performance in multi-node scenarios quantum circuit can be simulated using cache blocking technique, which allows using distributed memory spaces to simulate different parts of the statevector. This approach requires extra memory to handle data exchange between different processes.
Based on this, one can estimate the amount of memory needed with formula 2*p*2^(n), where p is precision (in bytes) for single statevector element and n is the total number of qubits in the circuit. For example, simulating circuit with 38 qubits using 16 byte precision requires 8589 GB memory, which corresponds to 16 LUMI standard-g nodes.

The blocking_qubits parameter sets size for single chunk of quantum circuit, which is distributed to different caches. The memory required to simulate a single chuck should not be larger than the smallest memory space in system. To use cache blocking optimally in LUMI, one should set blocking qubits to 29, which is maximum chunk capable to be handled by single GPU.

To increase the amount of parallelization, one can increase the number of chunks by reducing blocking qubits, and simultaneously increasing the number of parallel processes by allocating more nodes. This results in a faster runtime for simulation with a small increase used computing resources.

Author: let's revise the tables after this documentation is pushed since it is further optimization which may require more thorough testing and another project with more GPU hours

> | # of Qubits | # of Blocking Qubits | Recommended # of nodes | # gpus-per-node  |

Reviewer: Why is there so much whitespace in the `# of Qubits` column?

Author: because of the table headers

| 34          | 29                   | 1                      | 8                |
| 35          | 29                   | 2                      | 8                |
| 36          | 29                   | 4                      | 8                |
| 37          | 29                   | 8                      | 8                |
| 38          | 29                   | 16                     | 8                |
| 39          | 29                   | 32                     | 8                |
| 40          | 29                   | 64                     | 8                |
| 41          | 29                   | 128                    | 8                |
| 42          | 29                   | 256                    | 8                |
| 43          | 29                   | 512                    | 8                |
| 44          | 29                   | 1024                   | 8                |
| 45*         | 29                   | 2048                   | 8                |
* For a job submitted to LUMI where more than 1024 nodes are required, a special petition must be filed to request the allocation of such resources

## More information

> - [Qiskit documentation](https://qiskit.org/documentation/getting_started.html)

Reviewer 2: Add https://qiskit.github.io/qiskit-aer/howtos/running_gpu.html and https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.02957

Author: done

## More information

- [Qiskit-Aer Running with multiple-GPUs and/or multiple nodes](https://qiskit.github.io/qiskit-aer/howtos/running_gpu.html)
- [Cache Blocking Technique to Large Scale Quantum Computing Simulation on Supercomputers](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.02957)
- [Qiskit documentation](https://qiskit.org/documentation/getting_started.html)
- [Qiskit-aer documentation](https://qiskit.org/ecosystem/aer/tutorials/index.html)
